Hi and welcome to this video on floats we're going to start by looking at the internal representation
of floats How are real numbers floats actually represented in the computer.
So the float class is what Python uses by default for real numbers so when you type you know a calls
ten point five then the default class that is used by Python is called a float.
Now there are other ways to represent these real numbers and we'll look at that shortly in the decimal
class.
But the float is the more common one to use because decimal has some disadvantages such a speed takes
up no memory but more complicated to use.
Now the python float and I'm talking about C Python in particular is actually implemented using the
C double type the double precision floating point type in C which is usually implementing and I triple
A standard for floats and it's this standard here.
The Tripolis 7 5 4 double precision binary float.
That's a mouthful.
Very often it's shortened to just binary 64 but it is a standard way of representing floating point
numbers and computers and many languages will use it.
Not just Python C uses that as well as many others.
Now the float uses a fixed number of bytes.
Remember when we looked at integers we saw that integers could grow.
As you know as long as we wanted to and it would just take up more and more memory space as needed.
Floats are not the same.
Floats are a fixed width.
In other words they have a fixed number of bytes that can be used to store and represent floating point
numbers.
In particular it uses 8 bytes and that means 64 bits.
But Python also has some overhead of objects which means that in reality when we create a float in Python
we're actually using up 24 bytes.
But no matter how large our number is as long as it fits within.
You know what a float can actually contain.
We only are using 24 bytes.
Now this 8 bytes and 64 bits kind of depends on the C compiler as well.
So in this case what I'm really referring to is my version of Python which is C Python 3.6 on a 64 bit
operating system depending on how it was compiled how the Python interpreter was compiled.
The C double may actually be little different.
So that kind of depends.
But in general much more often than not.
You're using the standard C Python interpreter which means you are dealing with a 64 bit float.
Now those 64 bits are assigned to different parts of a real number.
And let's take a look at that.
So the first thing is we need a sign right.
Is a positive or negative.
So we'll use one bit for that.
And in general we'll use 0 to him to indicate that the number is positive and 1 to indicate that the
number is negative.
Now we also have an exponent and what I mean by an exponent.
Well if we look at this number 1.5 E to the negative 5.
Right this is the same thing as writing 1.5 times 10 to the negative 5.
And this notation is our standard in Python.
You can use that to create you know a literal for a floating point number.
The case of e can also be lower case it doesn't matter.
But this number here this negative 5.
That is the exponent so any number can be written as a number of times ten to the power of something
and that something is the exponent and that exponent 11 bits are reserved for it which means that the
exponents range can be from a minus thousand and twenty two thousand twenty three.
And then the rest of the 64 bits which is 52 bits is taken up by the significant digits.
So that gives us about 15 3:17 significant digits.
And I'm talking about base 10 digits so 0 9.
Now what are significant digits Exactly.
Well you can think of it very simplistically as all the digits except leading and trailing zeros.
It really has to do with how the numbers are represented in memory and the number of digits that we
need to represent that number in memory.
But simplistically just remove leading and trailing zeroes and that's the number of significant digits
you have in the number.
So for example one point two three four five has five significant digits.
Right because you need all of these digits to represent the numbers.
Same thing.
One two three four point five also has five significant digits.
Now that's not the same number right.
And even though it has the same digits it's not the same number but it has the same number of significant
digits.
Same thing with this number here.
1 2 3 4 5 with 1 2 3 4 5 6 zeros after that.
Well that is also a number with five significant digits because this is really nothing more than one
two three four five times ten to the six.
And so the six is the exponent.
Well that's stored in the exponents and the 1 2 3 4 5 are the a significant digit.
So we still have five significant digits.
Same thing here.
We have five significant digits right.
These leading zeros don't matter.
They're going to go into the xponent.
One two three four five times ten to the negative 50.
Again we have five significant digits.
This is the exponent negative 50 but we have five significant digits.
Same thing here.
One point two three four five ten right.
That is also five significant digits.
So the first thing we're going to look at is how can we represent real numbers using a decimal or a
base 10 version so we can represent numbers as base 10 integers and fractions.
And we've seen how to do base 10 integers.
Those are the regular integers we use every day when we'd speak you know 10 120 135.
These are based 10 integers they're in you know in base 10.
But what about what comes after the decimal point.
Well we can express those as fractions and in base 10 we can express them as decimal fractions or base
10 fractions.
So what do we mean by that.
Well let's take a look at an example let's look at 0.75.
This is seven divided by ten plus five divided by 100.
Right.
This is the 10th position.
This is the hundreds position.
So we can rewrite this as seven times tend to the negative one plus five times ten to the negative two.
Notice how we have a digit times some power of 10.
Now these digits are always going to be between 0 and 9.
And in this case this expansion only required two fractions with non-zero numerators which means that
we have two significant digits and we can see it from the number here as well.
We have two significant digits.
What about 0 1 2 5 6.
Well very similarly this is two over ten plus five over 100 plus six over 1000 which we can rewrite.
In this notation here in this form.
So we again we have these digits between 0 9 and powers of 10.
And you'll notice that as we move from left to right the powers of 10 become increasingly negative and
in this case well we needed three of these fractions to actually define the number.
And this means that we have three significant digits.
And again we can see that from the numbers.
Now of course we can also have numbers before the decimal point that are other than 0 for example one
two three point four five six.
Well as we saw before this is one times a hundred plus two times ten plus three times one plus for over
10 five over 100 6 over 1000.
So now we've just done that expansion basically to the left or to the right of the decimal point.
In this case we needed 1 2 3 4 5 6 of these terms to define the number and we therefore have 6 significant
digits.
Now we can rewrite this as one times ten to the two plus two times ten to the one plus three times ten
to the zero.
And then after the decimal point four times ten to the negative one plus five times then to the negative
two and so on.
And you'll notice that we just have decreasing powers of 10.
So as we move from left to right after the decimal point we have increasingly negative powers of 10
as we move from right to left before the decimal point.
We have increasing powers of 10 and in this case as I said we have six significant digits.
So in general right if we try and generalize this formula here this is what we get.
We get that our number right.
This number here is equal to some sum of a digit which is going to be between 0 9 times some power of
10.
Right this is just generalizing this formula here.
Now we're still missing the sign.
So we're going to bring in the sign and we're get to say OK sign is going to be some variable let's
say that's equal to zero when the number is positive and negative 1 when the number is negative.
So now we can rewrite this formula here to also include the sign of the number as follows.
If we take negative 1 and let's say it's a positive number the negative 1 to the power of 0.
Well that will be equal to one and the number to the power of 0 is 1 except for 0 to the power of zero
which is more of a convention and that can depend on how you want to look at it.
But if the number is negative then we have 1 for the sign right.
The sign is one.
If we have a negative number so we have negative one to the power of one which is negative 1.
So we'll end up with a negative sign on this expansion here which is what we're looking for because
we want a negative number.
Now one thing that comes up when we do expansions like this is that some numbers cannot be represented
using a finite number of terms.
Right.
And again this is the expansion here.
Well obviously numbers such as pie or square root of 2 don't have a finite representation right.
We cannot write.
You know we we don't stop here after the decimal point we have an infinite number of digits after the
decimal point.
And same thing for square root of two.
So obviously this summation here is going to be infinite.
We're going to end up with an infinite series.
So that's pretty obvious.
But we also have rational numbers some rational numbers cannot be represented using a finite representation
a finite sum like one third.
You know we write one third as 0.3 3:3 we put that little dot up here to indicate that that 3 is recurring
infinitely.
So one third is 0.3 333 and it doesn't matter how long you keep saying three.
At some point if you stop saying three you're no longer exactly equal to 1.
So you just have an approximation which might be very close but it's still an approximation because
you know at some point we all we have to stop counting those numbers out.
And the same thing over a computer a computer can store an infinite number of digits or an infinite
number of odd numbers after the decimal point.
And therefore we cannot represent one third exactly using this kind of notation or this summation here.
So again this is just three tens plus three hundred three thousands right.
This is just this expansion here.
And so that's and funded some hockey.
So we saw how to represent in decimal.
We saw that we had sometimes finite sums like 0.75 But we also have infinite sum sometimes when we have
one third of the rational number one third.
So now let's take a look at how we can represent these floating point numbers not in base 10 but in
base 2.
Since that's what we have to work with when we're dealing with computers we only have bits zeros and
ones so instead of powers of 10 we're going to use powers of two and our digits are going to be just
zero and 1 whereas before we are digits we're 0 for nine years just going to be 0 and 1.
So let's take a look at a binary float.
So this is a binary number zero point 1 1.
Base 2.
So we do have this decimal point I don't know if you call it a decimal point or maybe a binary point
at this at this stage.
But anyways so what does that equal to.
Well if we're talking about powers of two and of powers of 10 then we have 1 over 2 plus 1 to 4.
Now this is the base 10 equivalent which is 0.5 plus 0.5 which is 0.75 and base 10.
So 0.1 1 base to 0.75 base 10.
So let's look again at this expression here and let's rewrite it in the same way we rewrote powers of
10.
So we have 1 times 2 to the negative one plus one times 2 to the negative 2.
Now similarly we can look at this number here.
0 1 1 1 0 1.
Base 2.
Well that's one half plus one quarter plus 0 over 8 plus 1 over 16.
Again these are powers of 2.
So if we calculate the number we get that that's equal to zero point 8 1 to 5.
So 0.8 1 to 5 base 10 is zero point 1 1 0 1 2.
And again we could rewrite the expansion as follows.
It's 1 times 2 to the negative one plus 1 times 2 to the negative 2 plus 0 times 2 to the negative 3
plus 1 times 2 to the negative 4.
You'll notice all the digits are either zeros or ones and these denominators here are powers of 2.
And again they become increasingly negative as we move from left to right after the decimal point.
So this representation is very similar to the one we had with decimal numbers except we're just representing
a number using base two
so a binary representation is then given by this formula here which is exactly the same as what we had
previously except that these digits now will always be 0 0 0 1.
And instead of powers of 10 we have powers of 2 but same thing.
Now as you can imagine we also have problems representing certain numbers in a finite number of terms.
Right.
Just like we had a problem using one third in our decimal expansion.
We also have problems representing certain numbers in a binary expansion and a very simple example is
the 0.1 of one tenth.
Now that has an exact representation in decimal.
It's one tenth right it's 0.1.
But not so in binary in binary we do not have a finite representation.
This is the binary number that we have to use to approximate one tenth or 0.1 it is zero point zero
and then the sequence of bits 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1.
That just keeps recurring.
So this is just like the example we had with one third.
Except that with zero point one we have a similar problem.
We cannot represent that exactly in base 2.
So let's take a look at what this means.
So if we just expand the south to fractions right.
So we have zero the first position is toos or we 1 over to this second position is one of the four.
So third one of 8 1 was 16 1 over 32 his powers of 2.
So we can write it out this way.
Right.
We have 0 over 0 4 0 8 0 1 over 16 1 over 32 etc. and let's start actually calculating what those numbers
are.
They should add up to 0.1.
Now they'll never exactly add up to 0.1 because this sequence of numbers is infinite.
This is an infinite series.
All right.
So tossing out all the zero terms in these fractions we end up with these.
And the first fraction is 0.06 to 5.
So if we were to stop at the first significant digit here one right we would end up with actually 0.06
to 5 in decimal which is not exactly close to zero point 1.
But if we keep going to more and more of these bits let's add in one over 32.
So now we have zero point 0 9 3 7 5 much closer to zero point 1 plus the remaining terms and we can
keep adding.
You know now we can add the one over 256 into this and I would get 0 1 0 9 7 6 5 6 2 5 k.
Et cetera et cetera.
Now you've got to be careful right.
It looks like oh we're undershooting the 0.1.
While we may be at this point but sometimes you could be overshooting as well.
So your your approximation to the number that you're trying to represent may be slightly larger or slightly
smaller than the exact value and we'll see examples of that when we look at the code.
OK.
So that's the binary representation of a number of a decimal number.
And that is indeed how it's stored in the computer.
So as we've seen some numbers that do have a finite decimal representation like 0.1 right do not have
a finite binary representation.
Now because some do right not every number is going to have an infinite binary representation.
In fact we saw some 0.1 to 5 right.
Was 1 8.
That's a power of two in the in the denominator so we know that we are going to get an exact binary
representation
right.
So 0.75 based 10 was 0.1 1 base 2.
That's a finite representation.
Same thing with Zero Point 8 1 2 5 and base 10 that has this binary representation 0.1 1 0 1.
That's also finite.
Now because these are finite representations This means that we have an exact flow representation.
So when we type in 0.75 and Python exactly 0.75 will be still and will be precise.
On the other hand if we say A equals zero point 1 we're not going to be storing 0.1 exactly it's going
to be that zero point 9 9 9.
You know and a bunch of numbers after that.
Right.
Because it is this infinite representation.
So because of that we only have an approximate float representation in Python and this isn't the shortcoming
of Python this is going to be true of any computing language.
It's because of the fact that computers use binary used bits zeros and ones and so therefore at some
point we have to basically transform our decimal number into a binary number.
And because of that we run into these approximation issues.
So let's switch to some code and see how all that works and we'll do that in the next video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.